<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-25" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XXV</h2>
			<h3>Balance All</h3>
			<p>The road to Sampson County lay for the most part over the pine-clad sandhills⁠—an alternation of gentle rises and gradual descents, with now and then a swamp of greater or less extent. Long stretches of the highway led through the virgin forest, for miles unbroken by a clearing or sign of human habitation.</p>
			<p>They traveled slowly, with frequent pauses in shady places, for the weather was hot. The journey, made leisurely, required more than a day, and might with slight effort be prolonged into two. They stopped for the night at a small village, where Wain found lodging for Rena with an acquaintance of his, and for himself with another, while a third took charge of the horse, the accommodation for travelers being limited. Rena’s appearance and manners were the subject of much comment. It was necessary to explain to several curious white people that Rena was a woman of color. A white woman might have driven with Wain without attracting remark⁠—most white ladies had negro coachmen. That a woman of Rena’s complexion should eat at a negro’s table, or sleep beneath a negro’s roof, was a seeming breach of caste which only black blood could excuse. The explanation was never questioned. No white person of sound mind would ever claim to be a negro.</p>
			<p>They resumed their journey somewhat late in the morning. Rena would willingly have hastened, for she was anxious to plunge into her new work; but Wain seemed disposed to prolong the pleasant drive, and beguiled the way for a time with stories of wonderful things he had done and strange experiences of a somewhat checkered career. He was shrewd enough to avoid any subject which would offend a modest young woman, but too obtuse to perceive that much of what he said would not commend him to a person of refinement. He made little reference to his possessions, concerning which so much had been said at Patesville; and this reticence was a point in his favor. If he had not been so much upon his guard and Rena so much absorbed by thoughts of her future work, such a drive would have furnished a person of her discernment a very fair measure of the man’s character. To these distractions must be added the entire absence of any idea that Wain might have amorous designs upon her; and any shortcomings of manners or speech were excused by the broad mantle of charity which Rena in her new-found zeal for the welfare of her people was willing to throw over all their faults. They were the victims of oppression; they were not responsible for its results.</p>
			<p>Toward the end of the second day, while nearing their destination, the travelers passed a large white house standing back from the road at the foot of a lane. Around it grew widespreading trees and well-kept shrubbery. The fences were in good repair. Behind the house and across the road stretched extensive fields of cotton and waving corn. They had passed no other place that showed such signs of thrift and prosperity.</p>
			<p>“Oh, what a lovely place!” exclaimed Rena. “That is yours, isn’t it?”</p>
			<p>“No; we ain’t got to my house yet,” he answered. “Dat house b’longs ter de riches’ people roun’ here. Dat house is over in de nex’ county. We’re right close to de line now.”</p>
			<p>Shortly afterwards they turned off from the main highway they had been pursuing, and struck into a narrower road to the left.</p>
			<p>“De main road,” explained Wain, “goes on to Clinton, ’bout five miles er mo’ away. Dis one we’re turnin’ inter now will take us to my place, which is ’bout three miles fu’ther on. We’ll git dere now in an hour er so.”</p>
			<p>Wain lived in an old plantation house, somewhat dilapidated, and surrounded by an air of neglect and shiftlessness, but still preserving a remnant of dignity in its outlines and comfort in its interior arrangements. Rena was assigned a large room on the second floor. She was somewhat surprised at the make-up of the household. Wain’s mother⁠—an old woman, much darker than her son⁠—kept house for him. A sister with two children lived in the house. The element of surprise lay in the presence of two small children left by Wain’s wife, of whom Rena now heard for the first time. He had lost his wife, he informed Rena sadly, a couple of years before.</p>
			<p>“Yas, Miss Rena,” she sighed, “de Lawd give her, an’ de Lawd tuck her away. Blessed be de name er de Lawd.” He accompanied this sententious quotation with a wicked look from under his half-closed eyelids that Rena did not see.</p>
			<p>The following morning Wain drove her in his buggy over to the county town, where she took the teacher’s examination. She was given a seat in a room with a number of other candidates for certificates, but the fact leaking out from some remark of Wain’s that she was a colored girl, objection was quietly made by several of the would-be teachers to her presence in the room, and she was requested to retire until the white teachers should have been examined. An hour or two later she was given a separate examination, which she passed without difficulty. The examiner, a gentleman of local standing, was dimly conscious that she might not have found her exclusion pleasant, and was especially polite. It would have been strange, indeed, if he had not been impressed by her sweet face and air of modest dignity, which were all the more striking because of her social disability. He fell into conversation with her, became interested in her hopes and aims, and very cordially offered to be of service, if at any time he might, in connection with her school.</p>
			<p>“You have the satisfaction,” he said, “of receiving the only first-grade certificate issued to-day. You might teach a higher grade of pupils than you will find at Sandy Run, but let us hope that you may in time raise them to your own level.”</p>
			<p>“Which I doubt very much,” he muttered to himself, as she went away with Wain. “What a pity that such a woman should be a nigger! If she were anything to me, though, I should hate to trust her anywhere near that saddle-colored scoundrel. He’s a thoroughly bad lot, and will bear watching.”</p>
			<p>Rena, however, was serenely ignorant of any danger from the accommodating Wain. Absorbed in her own thoughts and plans, she had not sought to look beneath the surface of his somewhat overdone politeness. In a few days she began her work as teacher, and sought to forget in the service of others the dull sorrow that still gnawed at her heart.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
