<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-29" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XXIX</h2>
			<h3>Plato Earns Half a Dollar</h3>
			<p>Tryon’s first feeling, when his mother at the dinner-table gave an account of her visit to the schoolhouse in the woods, was one of extreme annoyance. Why, of all created beings, should this particular woman be chosen to teach the colored school at Sandy Run? Had she learned that he lived in the neighborhood, and had she sought the place hoping that he might consent to renew, on different terms, relations which could never be resumed upon their former footing? Six weeks before, he would not have believed her capable of following him; but his last visit to Patesville had revealed her character in such a light that it was difficult to predict what she might do. It was, however, no affair of his. He was done with her; he had dismissed her from his own life, where she had never properly belonged, and he had filled her place, or would soon fill it, with another and worthier woman. Even his mother, a woman of keen discernment and delicate intuitions, had been deceived by this girl’s specious exterior. She had brought away from her interview of the morning the impression that Rena was a fine, pure spirit, born out of place, through some freak of Fate, devoting herself with heroic self-sacrifice to a noble cause. Well, he had imagined her just as pure and fine, and she had deliberately, with a negro’s low cunning, deceived him into believing that she was a white girl. The pretended confession of the brother, in which he had spoken of the humble origin of the family, had been, consciously or unconsciously, the most disingenuous feature of the whole miserable performance. They had tried by a show of frankness to satisfy their own consciences⁠—they doubtless had enough of white blood to give them a rudimentary trace of such a moral organ⁠—and by the same act to disarm him against future recriminations, in the event of possible discovery. How was he to imagine that persons of their appearance and pretensions were tainted with negro blood? The more he dwelt upon the subject, the more angry he became with those who had surprised his virgin heart and deflowered it by such low trickery. The man who brought the first negro into the British colonies had committed a crime against humanity and a worse crime against his own race. The father of this girl had been guilty of a sin against society for which others⁠—for which he, George Tryon⁠—must pay the penalty. As slaves, negroes were tolerable. As freemen, they were an excrescence, an alien element incapable of absorption into the body politic of white men. He would like to send them all back to the Africa from which their forefathers had come⁠—unwillingly enough, he would admit⁠—and he would like especially to banish this girl from his own neighborhood; not indeed that her presence would make any difference to him, except as a humiliating reminder of his own folly and weakness with which he could very well dispense.</p>
			<p>Of this state of mind Tryon gave no visible manifestation beyond a certain taciturnity, so much at variance with his recent liveliness that the ladies could not fail to notice it. No effort upon the part of either was able to affect his mood, and they both resigned themselves to await his lordship’s pleasure to be companionable.</p>
			<p>For a day or two, Tryon sedulously kept away from the neighborhood of the schoolhouse at Sandy Rim. He really had business which would have taken him in that direction, but made a detour of five miles rather than go near his abandoned and discredited sweetheart.</p>
			<p>But George Tryon was wisely distrustful of his own impulses. Driving one day along the road to Clinton, he overhauled a diminutive black figure trudging along the road, occasionally turning a handspring by way of diversion.</p>
			<p>“Hello, Plato,” called Tryon, “do you want a lift?”</p>
			<p>“Hoddy, Mars Geo’ge. Kin I ride wid you?”</p>
			<p>“Jump up.”</p>
			<p>Plato mounted into the buggy with the agility to be expected from a lad of his acrobatic accomplishments. The two almost immediately fell into conversation upon perhaps the only subject of common interest between them. Before the town was reached, Tryon knew, so far as Plato could make it plain, the estimation in which the teacher was held by pupils and parents. He had learned the hours of opening and dismissal of the school, where the teacher lived, her habits of coming to and going from the schoolhouse, and the road she always followed.</p>
			<p>“Does she go to church or anywhere else with Jeff Wain, Plato?” asked Tryon.</p>
			<p>“No, suh, she don’ go nowhar wid nobody excep’n’ ole Elder Johnson er Mis’ Johnson, an’ de child’en. She use’ ter stop at Mis’ Wain’s, but she’s stayin’ wid Elder Johnson now. She alluz makes some er de child’en go home wid er f’m school,” said Plato, proud to find in Mars Geo’ge an appreciative listener⁠—“sometimes one an’ sometimes anudder. I’s be’n home wid ’er twice, ann it’ll be my tu’n ag’in befo’ long.”</p>
			<p>“Plato,” remarked Tryon impressively, as they drove into the town, “do you think you could keep a secret?”</p>
			<p>“Yas, Mars Geo’ge, ef you says I shill.”</p>
			<p>“Do you see this fifty-cent piece?” Tryon displayed a small piece of paper money, crisp and green in its newness.</p>
			<p>“Yas, Mars Geo’ge,” replied Plato, fixing his eyes respectfully on the government’s promise to pay. Fifty cents was a large sum of money. His acquaintance with Mars Geo’ge gave him the privilege of looking at money. When he grew up, he would be able, in good times, to earn fifty cents a day.</p>
			<p>“I am going to give this to you, Plato.”</p>
			<p>Plato’s eyes opened wide as saucers. “Me, Mars Geo’ge?” he asked in amazement.</p>
			<p>“Yes, Plato. I’m going to write a letter while I’m in town, and want you to take it. Meet me here in half an hour, and I’ll give you the letter. Meantime, keep your mouth shut.”</p>
			<p>“Yas, Mars Geo’ge,” replied Plato with a grin that distended that organ unduly. That he did not keep it shut may be inferred from the fact that within the next half hour he had eaten and drunk fifty cents’ worth of candy, ginger-pop, and other available delicacies that appealed to the youthful palate. Having nothing more to spend, and the high prices prevailing for some time after the war having left him capable of locomotion, Plato was promptly on hand at the appointed time and place.</p>
			<p>Tryon placed a letter in Plato’s hand, still sticky with molasses candy⁠—he had inclosed it in a second cover by way of protection. “Give that letter,” he said, “to your teacher; don’t say a word about it to a living soul; bring me an answer, and give it into my own hand, and you shall have another half dollar.”</p>
			<p>Tryon was quite aware that by a surreptitious correspondence he ran some risk of compromising Rena. But he had felt, as soon as he had indulged his first opportunity to talk of her, an irresistible impulse to see her and speak to her again. He could scarcely call at her boarding-place⁠—what possible proper excuse could a young white man have for visiting a colored woman? At the schoolhouse she would be surrounded by her pupils, and a private interview would be as difficult, with more eyes to remark and more tongues to comment upon it. He might address her by mail, but did not know how often she sent to the nearest post-office. A letter mailed in the town must pass through the hands of a postmaster notoriously inquisitive and evil-minded, who was familiar with Tryon’s handwriting and had ample time to attend to other people’s business. To meet the teacher alone on the road seemed scarcely feasible, according to Plato’s statement. A messenger, then, was not only the least of several evils, but really the only practicable way to communicate with Rena. He thought he could trust Plato, though miserably aware that he could not trust himself where this girl was concerned.</p>
			<p>The letter handed by Tryon to Plato, and by the latter delivered with due secrecy and precaution, ran as follows:⁠—</p>
			<p class="letter">Dear Miss Warwick⁠—You may think it strange that I should address you after what has passed between us; but learning from my mother of your presence in the neighborhood, I am constrained to believe that you do not find my proximity embarrassing, and I cannot resist the wish to meet you at least once more, and talk over the circumstances of our former friendship. From a practical point of view this may seem superfluous, as the matter has been definitely settled. I have no desire to find fault with you; on the contrary, I wish to set myself right with regard to my own actions, and to assure you of my good wishes. In other words, since we must part, I would rather we parted friends than enemies. If nature and society⁠—or Fate, to put it another way⁠—have decreed that we cannot live together, it is nevertheless possible that we may carry into the future a pleasant though somewhat sad memory of a past friendship. Will you not grant me one interview? I appreciate the difficulty of arranging it; I have found it almost as hard to communicate with you by letter. I will suit myself to your convenience and meet you at any time and place you may designate. Please answer by bearer, who I think is trustworthy, and believe me, whatever your answer may be,</p>
			<p class="letter">Respectfully yours,<br/>
			 G. T.<br/></p>
			<p>The next day but one Tryon received through the mail the following reply to his letter:⁠—</p>
			<p class="letter">George Tryon, Esq.</p>
			<p class="letter">Dear Sir⁠—I have requested your messenger to say that I will answer your letter by mail, which I shall now proceed to do. I assure you that I was entirely ignorant of your residence in this neighborhood, or it would have been the last place on earth in which I should have set foot.</p>
			<p class="letter">As to our past relations, they were ended by your own act. I frankly confess that I deceived you; I have paid the penalty, and have no complaint to make. I appreciate the delicacy which has made you respect my brother’s secret, and thank you for it. I remember the whole affair with shame and humiliation, and would willingly forget it.</p>
			<p class="letter">As to a future interview, I do not see what good it would do either of us. You are white, and you have given me to understand that I am black. I accept the classification, however unfair, and the consequences, however unjust, one of which is that we cannot meet in the same parlor, in the same church, at the same table, or anywhere, in social intercourse; upon a steamboat we would not sit at the same table; we could not walk together on the street, or meet publicly anywhere and converse, without unkind remark. As a white man, this might not mean a great deal to you; as a woman, shut out already by my color from much that is desirable, my good name remains my most valuable possession. I beg of you to let me alone. The best possible proof you can give me of your good wishes is to relinquish any desire or attempt to see me. I shall have finished my work here in a few days. I have other troubles, of which you know nothing, and any meeting with you would only add to a burden which is already as much as I can bear. To speak of parting is superfluous⁠—we have already parted. It were idle to dream of a future friendship between people so widely different in station. Such a friendship, if possible in itself, would never be tolerated by the lady whom you are to marry, with whom you drove by my schoolhouse the other day. A gentleman so loyal to his race and its traditions as you have shown yourself could not be less faithful to the lady to whom he has lost his heart and his memory in three short months.</p>
			<p class="letter">No, Mr. Tryon, our romance is ended, and better so. We could never have been happy. I have found a work in which I may be of service to others who have fewer opportunities than mine have been. Leave me in peace, I beseech you, and I shall soon pass out of your neighborhood as I have passed out of your life, and hope to pass out of your memory.</p>
			<p class="letter">Yours very truly,<br/>
			 Rowena Walden.<br/></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
